---
tags: blogPosts
layout: blog-post.html
title: "Eleventy + Lit"
summary: "Announcing a new Lit Labs Eleventy plugin for static pre-rendering of Lit components"
date: 2022-02-07
author:
  - al-marks
---

The Lit team is pleased to announce the first release of
[`@lit-labs/eleventy-plugin-lit`](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/eleventy-plugin-lit),
a new plugin for [Eleventy](https://www.11ty.dev/) that pre-renders your Lit
components as static HTML during your Eleventy build, and lets you re-hydrate
them after your JavaScript loads.

<center>

![@lit-labs/eleventy-plugin-lit GitHub repo](/images/blog/eleventy/repo-screenshot.png){height="600" align="center"}

</center>

<aside class="warning">

As with all Lit Labs projects, this release should be considered experimental
and incomplete. We'd love for you to try it out and leave feedback, but expect
to find a few rough edges.

Check out the <a
href="https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/eleventy-plugin-lit">roadmap</a>
for a list of issues and missing features we're still working on.

</aside>

Check it out now on
[GitHub](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/eleventy-plugin-lit)
and [NPM](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@lit-labs/eleventy-plugin-lit), or read
on to learn more about what it does, how it works, and why you might want to use
it.

## What does it do?

After you've added `@lit-labs/eleventy-plugin-lit` to your Eleventy config, then
whenever you write a custom element tag in a markdown or HTML file, the initial
state of that component's shadow DOM and styles will be rendered directly into
the static HTML.

For example, given a markdown file `hello.md`:

```html
# Greetings

<demo-greeter name="World"></demo-greeter>
```

And a component definition `js/demo-greeter.js`:

```js
import {LitElement, html, css} from 'lit';

class DemoGreeter extends LitElement {
  static styles = css`
    b { color: red; }
  `;

  static properties = {
    name: {},
  };

  render() {
    return html`Hello <b>${this.name}</b>!`;
  }
}
customElements.define('demo-greeter', DemoGreeter);
```

Then Eleventy will produce an HTML file `greeting/index.html` like this:

```html
<h1>Greetings</h1>

<demo-greeter name="World">
  <template shadowroot="open">
    <style>
      b { color: red; }
    </style>
    Hello <b>World</b>!
  </template>
</demo-greeter>
```

This HTML allows the browser to paint the initial state of the component's DOM
and styles, preserving all of the encapsulation boundaries of web components,
even before a single line of JavaScript has downloaded!

Later, when the JavaScript definition of `<demo-greeter>` has finally loaded,
the pre-rendered component is upgraded to its fully interactive JavaScript
implementation through a process called re-hydration.

## Why should I use it?

Pre-rendering components is an effective method for reducing the time it takes
between a page starting to load, and the content becoming visible â€” a
measurement known as the *time to first paint (FP)* or *time to first contentful
paint (FCP)*. This is an important factor that contributes to the responsiveness
of your site, particularly for users with slower connections and devices.

By transmitting the pre-rendered initial state of your components using
declarative HTML, the browser is able to paint the initial view much faster than
it takes to download, parse, and evaluate the JavaScript implementations of
those components.

For a deeper dive into the benefits of pre-rendering, check out *[Rendering on
the Web
(developers.google.com)](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2019/02/rendering-on-the-web)*.

## How does it work?

### Lit SSR

The plugin uses `@lit-labs/ssr` under the hood, which works by creating an
instance of each component in a lightweight browser-like environment within the
Eleventy Node process, and evaluating the element's template using a special
version of Lit's `render` function. This special `render` function behaves much
like the `render` function that Lit uses in the browser, except that it emits
stream of strings, instead of writing to the DOM.

For more information about `@lit-labs/ssr`, checkout its [GitHub
repo](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/ssr). We'll be
expanding the documentation soon to help developers integrate Lit pre-rendering
into their tools and frameworks too.

### Declarative Shadow DOM

When a component is statically pre-rendered, its shadow DOM and styles are
represented using the `<template shadowroot>` HTML element. When the browser's
HTML parser encounters one of these elements, it applies the template's content
as the shadow root of its parent element. This way, all of the DOM and style
encapsulation guarantees of web components are preserved, all using declarative
HTML.

As of February 2022, Chrome and Edge have native support for Declarative Shadow
DOM, but Firefox and Safari have not yet implemented it. A very small polyfill
is available for browsers that don't yet have support. Integrating the polyfill
into your site is
[documented](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/eleventy-plugin-lit#ponyfill)
in the `@lit-labs/eleventy-plugin-lit` README.

For more information about Declarative Shadow DOM, check out *[Declarative
Shadow DOM (web.dev)](https://web.dev/declarative-shadow-dom/)*.

### Re-hydration

While static pre-rendering lets your components' initial paint happen as quickly
as possible, the components won't yet be interactive, because their JavaScript
implementations haven't loaded.

*Re-hydration* is the process where a statically pre-rendered component is
upgraded to its JavaScript implementation, becoming responsive and interactive.

Lit comes with automatic support for re-hydration via the special
`lit/experimental-hydrate-support.js` module. As long as this module has been
loaded, Lit components will detect when they have been pre-rendered, and adopt
the shadow root that has already been attached to them.

Re-hydration with Lit is very efficient, because Lit knows that it doesn't need
to re-render the existing shadow root when it upgrades. If data changes after
hydration, then only the parts of the shadow root that changed will be updated.

## What's next?

Check out the
[roadmap](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/eleventy-plugin-lit#roadmap)
for `@lit-labs/eleventy-plugin-lit` for some of the main features and fixes you
can expect to land over the coming months.

If you try out `@lit-labs/eleventy-plugin-lit`, let us know if you have any
suggestions or find any problems by starting a
[discussion](https://github.com/lit/lit/discussions) or filing an
[issue](https://github.com/lit/lit/issues).
